>>Ron Davis was born as an
autistic and dyslexic in a time
when there was little compassion
for those who were different.
This heart rending
story takes us
into the mind of someone who was
unable to communicate and tell
the age of 17.
By 19 he was teaching calculus.
At 36 he was a millionaire,
but still ashamed
that he couldn't read.
That's when the lights went on
and he discovered that dyslexia
is a gift that can be
turned off and on that will.
>>So Ron, let's start
at the beginning.
Your story is not
only unique, it's
very heart rending as well.
You had a pretty bumpy
start to this life.
Can you tell us how
you journey began.
>>As an infant, my mother was
told I was a Kanners baby.
Doctor Leo Kanner
coined the word "autism"
in the United States.
But I was actually born the
year before it was published.
So I was never actually
called artistic,
I was only called
a Kanners baby.
And I don't know what my mother
was told about Kanners babies.
I don't know if she was
told of the probability
that I would have
grandma epilepsy.
Or the possibility that I would
never develop enough language
skills to even talk to her.
Or that I would never allow
her to hold me, or cuddle me,
or treat me like a normal child.
And that I might only have the
intelligence of the chimpanzee.
My mother was very good hearing
only what you wanted to hear.
And what my mother heard
was, I was going to be slow.
At the end of the
Second World War,
when my father came
home from the war,
he was very surprised
to find that he
had a three year old,
mentally deficient child.
That surprise very
quickly turned into anger,
and then hatred.
And when the time came for
me to start into school,
the school put
pressure on my parents
to have me put into
an institution.
My mother was in
denial, and my father
would have been very
happy to have me go away.
And essentially, my
mom told the school,
he's going to be slow
but you have to take him.
The school really
didn't know what
to do with someone like me.
So I wound up sitting in
the corner of the room
with a handkerchief on my head.
And I'm often asked,
why the handkerchief?
And tell you the
truth, I don't know.
I was a person
wearing it, I wasn't
the person that put it there.
>>Oh, you were labeled
with the handkerchief.
You didn't do it to yourself?
>>No, no, no, no.
In fact, my back to the room
and my nose was in the corner.
And if that handkerchief
ever fell off, boy, I
would get a good hard whack,
they'd put it back on,
and stick my nose
tight into the corner.
>>May I ask you a
question at this point,
because I want to hear where
this story goes from here.
>>Sure.
>>But as you were sitting
there with your nose
pointed into the corner
and a handkerchief
on you head, what was
going on in your world?
>>Well, for most of the time
I was oblivious to everything.
Developmentally, I didn't
begin to actually develop
at all until around
the age of nine.
And I think that, emotionally
and psychologically,
I did between the
ages of nine and 12,
what a normal child does between
birth and the age of two.
And I did between
the ages of 12 and 15
what a normal child does between
the ages of two and four.
So for the first
six years or so I
was totally oblivious
to everything
that was going on around me.
But as I began to develop out
of the autism, I became aware.
I became aware that
I was different
and that I was being
treated differently.
And literally, by the
time I was 12 years old,
there wasn't a sin or a crime
I wouldn't have committed
with a great big grin on my face
if it would have gotten me out
of the corner of the room.
But what they wanted
me to do I couldn't do.
I couldn't learn.
When I was 12 years old I
didn't even know my own name.
Now, I knew where
to go to go home,
but I didn't know the name
of the street or the number.
And it wouldn't
have been any value
to know those things
anyway, because when
I was 12 I still hadn't
learn how to talk.
So I don't know what happened.
At the beginning of
every school year
there was pressure
put on my parents
to have me taken away
or labeled something.
And at the beginning
of every year
I'm sure my mother
told them, he's slow,
but you have to keep him.
So the year I was 12
something happened.
I don't know if the laws
changed and the school could
act without my mother,
or if my mother finally
gave in to their pressure.
But the year I was 12, the words
uneducatable mental retardation
were put into my school records.
And that labeling, for me,
was both something wonderful
and something that was terrible.
It was wonderful because
with that labeling,
I no longer had to sit in
the corner of the room.
In fact, I even changed schools.
But I wasn't put
into a school that
was for mentally retarded
children, that labeling was
both a blessing
and a curse for me.
It was a blessing
because I no longer had
to sit in the
corner of the room.
I also got to change
schools, but I
wasn't put into a school for
mentally retarded children,
I was just put it into a school
where the other children didn't
know about me or who I was.
And I like magic,
I start stopped
wetting my pants
every day in school.
And the other children
stopped teasing me.
But I still was referred to
by the teachers as the MR kid,
or an idiot, or an imbecile.
And that word imbecile is one
that I particularly don't like.
Only name than I ever had a
home from my father was dummy.
And I guess that was
the best of all of them,
because dummy
means the inability
to speak and not very bright.
And at that time, I think I fit
into both of those categories.
But later, that
labeling was a curse.
Later in my life,
if my colleagues
would have discovered that
those words were attached to me,
I would've simply died of shame.
Can you imagine
the embarrassment
that a person would experience?
I'm faking it, pretending
to be a real human being.
And then other people
find out that actually I
was mentally retarded.
And actually, it goes a
little deeper than that.
When I was 12 my
mom was told that I
had the intelligence
of the chimpanzee.
My mother was told
that I had an IQ of 40,
and a chimpanzee
has an IQ of 40.
And that I would
never learn any more
than what you'd
teach a chimpanzee.
Well, my older
brother-- when you
have a family that has a
member of the family like me,
essentially the whole family
becomes dysfunctional.
And it was especially
bad for my older brother
because he was the one that
had to take care of me.
So he harbored a great deal
is animosity towards me,
and I can understand why
he did a lot of the things
that he did now.
Of course, back then
I didn't understand.
But he would tease me.
One of the ways
he would tease me
is see he would say
that I was supposed
to be a monkey in a jungle, but
I wound up being his brother
instead.
And the thing that
really got to me
was he would say I was
a mistake God made,
and that my older brother
was being tortured by that.
And I didn't have sophisticated
enough thought ability to know
that I was being teased, or I
wasn;t being told the truth.
So literally, during most
of that period of time
after I began having the
ability to understand,
my conception was that I was a
mistake, I was an abomination,
I was something that
shouldn't exist.
But I did exist.
And it wasn't until
much later than that,
when I was 17 years old,
I actually had an IQ test.
And at that point,
they stopped calling me
idiot, imbecile,
and words like that.
>>What did you test out to?
>>The first testing we did
I scored 137 points on an IQ
tests.
And they said, oh my,
we made a mistake.
He's got a IQ.
>>Big mistake.
>>And at that
point, the decision
was made that I would
get speech therapy
and I would learn how
to talk in sentences.
And they also wanted educate me,
so they were going to teach me
how to read, and
write, and spell,
and all of the normal things
>>Beginning at age 17.
>>Yeah.
And the speech therapy worked.
It was absolutely wonderful.
I had a fantastic
speech therapist.
Her name was Doctor
Meredith Evans.
And I wish she could have
lived to the point where
she could see what
I'm doing today.
She would be impressed, I think.
And if you're at all
aware of our organization,
there's a great deal
of her influence
and the essence of who she is.
Her spirit very
much is a reflection
of many of the things we do.
Without her I would
still be hiding
in the back of the closet
behind the clothes.
>>But with her help, you were
able to make magnificent leaps
between the ages of 17 and 19.
>>Well, actually, the speech
therapy, in the beginning,
was a very painful thing
for me to experience.
In fact, I ran
away from it twice.
And the third time, when I came
back, she told me the truth.
She told me that she
wasn't able to fix me.
The only person that
could do that was myself.
Now, she was willing
to help me get there.
But if I was going
to make it, I was
going to have to
do it by myself.
And that little
piece of information
is what made all work actually.
And then I got involved
in the reading training.
And a lot of people
would think that there's
been a great deal of improvement
over the years in the way
they were treating
dyslexic individuals,
but to tell you
the truth, not so.
So one of the things
I had to do is
I had to crawl around on the
floor for an hour every day.
I had to balance
on a teeter board
and on a balance board for
a little while every day.
And then I was subjected
to a great deal of phonics.
I have to tell you that I was
pretty good at crawling around.
That was easy.
I was also very
good at the balance.
But the phonics for me
was absolute torture.
Within the first five minutes
of every one of those sessions
it would literally become
emotional and physical pain
for me to try to endure it.
And after almost a year of
being subjected to that,
everybody gave up.
Now I had given up
long before that,
but then everybody else did.
And the medical doctor
that was on the staff
there told me that I
was never ever going
to learn how to read and write.
And the reason
for it was, when I
was being born the
doctor used instruments,
he pinched my head, and he
ruined that part of my brain
that I would need to use
to learn how to read.
>>They didn't know much
about dyslexia at this time?
>>Well, they still don't.
When I told my mom
what the doctor said,
my mom said, no,
that didn't happen.
She said that my
birth happened so fast
there wasn't time
for instruments.
But also my mom didn't
always tell me the truth.
But it did make my
life a little easier.
It was easier at
that point for me
to believe that it
was a mistake that
was made by a doctor, a
man, and not a mistake
that God had made.
And that I was or I had
justification for existing.
Now in spite of all this,
I became an engineer.
Even though I couldn't
read and write.
>>Were you self taught?
>>Everything for me
has been self taught.
In the 1960s we were in a race
to get to the moon with Russia.
And our government
realized that there
was a lack of good engineers
in the United States.
And at that point,
you could actually
be certified as an
engineer without having
graduated from a University.
Of course, you had to
be a engineer already,
but that's the kind
of engineer I am.
I'm a certified
mechanical engineer.
>>How did you end up
choosing engineering?
How did this develop?
>>Well I had been an engineer.
I think I was born that way.
I have a great love
of mathematics.
When I was younger, way
before it ever speak.
In fact, I was doing math before
I had the ability to remember.
When I was eight years old
I was doing trigonometry.
Now savantism usually
doesn't bridge over
into formula type mathematics.
It's adding, subtracting,
multiplying, and dividing.
Yet, for some reason,
I made the bridge.
And I've only had
two formal classes
in mathematics in my life.
The first one was when I was
in ninth grade in school.
I was allowed to take an
algebra class that I failed.
And I failed because I
never wrote down anything
but answers.
And then I took trigonometry
at a university.
And at that time I was
also taking English.
So I never, ever went to math
class, I just went on the first
and then days of tests.
And I think in that
class I got a B.
But I could do
trigonometry for 10 years
before I ever took the class.
I mean, for me it was
a part of who I was.
It was more a part of me than my
hands and feet were to do math.
So I've always had a great
love for mathematics.
>>Do autism and savant
usually got hand in hand?
>>Well, now that there's a
great deal more understood
about what autism is.
The words savant,
of idiot savant,
it was coined for
people like me.
And there are other areas
that it can bridge over into;
music, art, many other things.
>>Did you have other
areas besides mathematics
that it did bridge over into?
>>Well, I could play
any musical instrument
that I could get my hands on.
My mother's mother was
a classical pianist.
That, in her own
right, was considered
a bit of a child protege.
When she was 16, before they
came to the United States,
she toured Europe performing
with Albert Schweitzer.
The Scheitzer family
made pianos and organs
and they would do tours.
Anyway, my grandmother
had a grand piano
that only she was
allowed to touch.
And then she had an
upright that everybody else
but me could touch.
And I wasn't allowed
to get close to it.
If I got too close, I
would get shooed away.
But math and, to a agree, art--
>>Did you finally get
to play that piano?
>>No.
And when I came
out of the autism,
I left my music
appreciation behind.
But I did bring my
art appreciation,
and what was most
important, the math.
>>So going back to the
story then in the 1960s
we had a race to the moon
with the Russians and Nigeria.
>>I was certified
as an engineer,
but before that I
was a technician.
I discovered going too
technical institutes.
Now, I was always sent
by employers to these,
and I did graduate from five
different technical institutes.
And then was later
certified as an engineer.
But soon after being
certified as an engineer,
I turned my back on all of it.
I was living in Dallas,
Texas at the time.
And I came to San
Fransisco to be a hippy.
>>We were talking off-camera a
little bit ago about something
that happened when you
were 19 years old, where
some entities were tapping
into your engineering ability.
>>Well, at that point in time,
I was the only a technician.
They were taking
advantage of my ability
to think mathematically.
And the logic that comes
with mathematical thinking.
>>And how were they
trying to utilize it?
>>I could figure out
how to make things work.
>>Things the government needed
to provide some answers to?
>>It wasn't the
government, per se,
it was through the industry
that was providing weaponry,
and missiles, and things
for the American government.
So that's how that--
>>The defense industry.
>>I worked on the
Polaris missile system,
I work on the Minutemen
missile system.
And then later, the air to
air missiles and surface
to air missiles.
In fact, that was part
of the whole impetus
to pursue being a hippy.
>>Yes, let's go into that.
>>I realized that
everything I was doing
was intended to hurt
or to kill people.
And I didn't want
to do that anymore.
So I'm just essentially
one day decided,
and I just turned around and
walked away from everything.
>>So what happened
after you ended up
in the middle of all
the flower power?
>>I actually failed
at being a hippy.
And of all the things
that I have failed at,
that was probably the worst.
I mean, if you really
think about it--
>>How can you fail
at being a hippy?
We weren't laid back enough,
or [INAUDIBLE], or what?
>>The reason I failed
was because of the drugs.
And it wasn't that I had a
moral or an ethical issue
against the drugs,
it's that I simply
didn't like what they did to me.
And I didn't understand
it at the time,
but I fully understand it now.
The drugs caused me to be
disoriented, and actually
disorientation-- the
state of disorientation,
has been at the root of all my
problems for all of my life.
And to deliberately
do that to myself,
I found it to be very offensive.
>>After you just worked
your way out of it.
>>Well, it actually
is still a factor.
But I have turned
it to my advantage
and not my disadvantage.
So I found myself faking
it, being a hippy.
>>Faking it being
stoned when you weren't?
[LAUGHING]
>>Yeah.
So I just decided,
well, I might as well
fake being an ordinary
person, the same as this.
So I found myself in
a bit of a quandary.
I couldn't continue in that
lifestyle, being a hippy.
And I couldn't go back to the
lifestyle I had come from,
which is designing and building
weapons for killing people.
So I had to find a job.
So I got a job as a driving
instructor in San Fransisco.
And that actually was not my
first experience teaching.
When I was 19, one of
the jobs that I had to do
was I had to teach calculus
to the technicians that
were working with me at
[INAUDIBLE] Corporation.
And as much as I
love mathematics,
teaching mathematics
that way, I hated it,
because I was going to
a classroom every day
with the chalkboard
and all of that.
And I myself have never learned
anything in a classroom.
So even though I
love mathematics,
I hated teaching it that way.
But when I was working
as a driving instructor,
I wasn't in a classroom, I
was in a car with someone.
And I was working one with
one with the individual.
And if the person made a mistake
we would catch it immediately.
We would figure out a
solution for the error,
implement the solution, and
the error would disappear.
And for me, that was a feeling
of instant gratification.
And I really like that feeling
so I really liked that job.
And to tell you the truth, I'd
probably still be doing it,
but I caught the company
that I was working
for-- I cause them
cheating my students.
And I confronted them with that
and, of course, they denied it,
so the only thing I
could do was quit.
>>So what happened
between that point
were you were having some real
gratification in the workforce
to beginning your
understanding with working
with a dyslexic mind?
>>There were a lot of different
condentations between then
and now.
When I stopped being a hippy,
I started to Volkswagen repair
shop in San Francisco.
I mean, that's not a bad thing
for an ex-engineer to do.
Not long after that, I created
a metals brokerage company.
And not long after that,
I started my career
in real estate.
And not long after
that, I realized
the great American dream for
the second time in my life,
and that was to
be a millionaire.
And in the late 1960s,
the real estate market
started to slow down and
my wife and I retired.
Excuse me, I misstated.
In the late 1970s,
the real estate market
started to slow down, my
wife and I retired out
of real estate.
And we had more
than enough money
for the rest of our lives, no
matter what we wanted to do.
So I was 36 years old
and I was retired.
Now, one of the
things I did is I
hid my shame behind
being successful.
In other words, I was hiding
my low self esteem behind work.
And when you're hiding
the fact that you're
a mistake that God made, or
a mistake that some man made,
and that you're not a real human
being, what better way to hid
it then behind being successful.
Excuse me.
So I was being successful.
And in order to
do that, I didn't
work like a normal human being.
I worked between 12
and 20 hours every day,
and I did work every day.
So I never went to
the movies, I worked.
I never went to church,
never went to weddings
or funerals because
I was working.
I never want to parties, I
never went to the theater
because I worked.
And I was very
successful at work
because no one ever discovered
that I couldn't read.
>>During all of that--
>>During all of that.
>>Absolutely amazing.
>>But then we
looked at retiring,
and retirement means
that you don't work.
And the idea of retiring
wasn't a bad idea.
But what was a bad
idea was not working,
because I lost my
ability to hide.
Now, it isn't just that I
was hiding my inadequacy
from other people, I was
also hiding it from myself.
And what was happening
is, with every day,
I was getting more
and more depressed.
Of course, I didn't realize
that's what it was at the time.
And I'm not the kind of person
that will go to a doctor.
I'm afraid of them, I
just don't like them.
>>They didn't serve you well
in childhood, it sounds like.
>>Well, I'm not going to
get very deep into that,
because I could
get into trouble.
But I came to a point
where I realized
that I was going to
have to do something
about the way I was feeling
or I was going to die.
And for me, all of my life art
has been the real narcotic.
If I get involved
with something--
even if it's simply drawing
something, or sketching
something, or chipping
a piece of stone,
or carving a piece of wood, or
making something out of clay,
or painting-- literally,
the rest of world
goes away until I finished
doing what I was doing.
And I felt that if I couldn't
hide my problem behind work,
I could be oblivious
to it with art.
Now, I didn't feel that
I had enough talent
to earn a living as an artist,
but I was in a position
that I needed to earn a living,
so I started to play with it.
And within a year, I was
working as a portrait sculptor
and I discovered that I
could make a wonderful living
as an artist.
To the point that, if I ever
have the misfortune again
of retiring, I'm going to go
back and be an artist again.
Because for me, it was like
dying and doing to heaven.
And it was when I was
working as an artist I began
to notice things that
didn't make sense
to the engineering in me.
What I noticed was that when
I was at my artistic best,
I was at my dyslexic worst.
And I had believed
that my problem
was a structural problem.
I believed the reason I couldn't
learn how to read and write
was because I had
brain damage, which
means it is a
structural problem.
And one of the things
about a structural problem
is that the characteristics
of the problem
has to remain the same.
And I was noticing that it
wasn't remaining the same.
And my thinking
was, I can't have
brain damage this afternoon
and tomorrow morning it's
going to go away
for a little while,
tomorrow afternoon it's
going to come back again.
That cannot work.
Then the thinking was,
well, if the problem is not
a structural problem,
then what can it be?
And the answer is, the only
other thing that it can be
is that it's a
functional problem.
If it is a functional
problem that means
I am either doing
something that causes it,
or I'm failing to do something
and that's what causes it.
And with that thinking,
I became a researcher
in the field of dyslexia.
And within 36 hours
after starting looking,
I discovered something
that I could do inside
of my head that made all of
the symptoms simply go away.
And that day, I
went to a library
and I read a book from
cover to cover in one day.
>>Can you share in this
moment, or do we need to--
>>What book it was?
>>No.
What it was that you
could go in your hear.
I discovered what we
now call orientation.
Now, what I discovered was
a very rudimentary form.
It was just the beginning of it.
But when I was in
an oriented state,
the words on the
bottom of the page
were just as big as the
words on the top of the page.
There were spaces
between the letters,
there was actually
punctuation marks.
Literally, the letters didn't
run together with the words,
there were spaces
between the words,
you could clearly see them.
And I had been struggling
to learn how to read,
or struggling with
reading, my whole life.
Now, prior to that day it isn't
that I couldn't read at all--
I would say that what
the average person could
reading maybe five minutes,
I could get through it
in maybe an hour, maybe
a little more than that.
But I would never be really
certain if I got it all
or if I got it correctly.
But what I discovered was
this very rudimentary form
of orientation.
And I read a whole
book in one day.
Now, I never dreamed of the
ability to read a whole book.
For me, that dream would
have been a nightmare.
I never prayed for the
ability to read a whole book.
I didn't think that's
the kind of prayer
that God would answer.
So one day in my life,
I had an experience
that was beyond my
ability to dream
and beyond my ability to pray.
And as a result of
that experience,
two things occurred.
The most important
thing that occurred
was that it was the
first day of my life
that I considered myself
as a real human being.
I considered myself as not being
a mistake that anyone had made,
and that I had just as much
right as any other human
to be alive.
>>Now you're getting at the real
heart of the issue of dyslexia
is this sense of being less
than that each of these people
carry with them.
>>Indeed.
Indeed.
>>And so what did this
do to inspire you then
to launch into this
as a life path?
>>Several things.
The other thing that
happened that day
is, I made a mistake in thinking
that I cured myself of dyslexia
Now prior to then, I
had never told anyone
that I had dyslexia.
It is something that
I was ashamed of.
I didn't want anyone to know.
In fact, I went to great
lengths to hide it from people.
But after I thought
I was cured, I
didn't waste any time
telling people I was cured.
And surprisingly,
a lot of people
came out of the
woodwork, it seemed
like, that asked me
if I would help them.
And prior to that
point in time, I
didn't know anyone
else that had dyslexia.
Literally, I thought I was a
lot more rare than I really was.
And I didn't know any other
people that were dyslexic.
And it turns out,
there were a lot of us
that were hiding
it from each other.
And I started doing
with them the same kind
of torture I put myself through.
And literally, we started
to see tremendous change.
But I also, along
the way, realized
that I hadn't actually
cured myself of dyslexia.
I realized at the very
most all I had found
was a piece to a
puzzle, and there
were other puzzle pieces
that had to be found.
>>Was the beginning
point you're were
talking about, about
finding this orientation?
>>Yes.
And in fact, what I was
doing, I didn't even
understand at the time
that's what it was.
So this actually occurred--
the break through actually
occurred in December of 1980.
By April of 1981, I
realized I wasn't cured.
And shortly after that,
I and two other people
created the Reading
Research Council.
And we had two
basic goals in mind.
And I had a hidden agenda.
The first goal was to
see if we could find out
what dyslexia really was.
To see if we could find the
rest of the puzzle pieces
that it was composed of.
The second goal was, if
we find the puzzle pieces,
to see if we could figure out
how to put that puzzle together
so we could actually
cure dyslexia.
Of course, at that time,
we didn't understand it
to the point to realize that
we wouldn't want to cure it.
And my hidden agenda
was, I'm paying for this
so I get to be the
first person in line.
So by December of
1981, we had enough
of a rudimentary understanding
of the puzzle pieces
that we could start
to put them together.
And by April of 1982, we
knew what would actually
have to be done in
order to correct it.
We hadn't done it
yet, but we knew
what we would have to do in
order to make that happen.
And in April of 1982,
we started working
with individuals in the public.
And the first year that
we were in operation,
we had a 93% success rate.
>>Did you have them crawling?
>>No, absolutely not.
That just shows the
ignorance the people.
When we first started
looking at dyslexia,
there were two prevailing
beliefs-- actually,
there were three-- prevailing
beliefs about what dyslexia was
and what caused it.
The first one goes
clear back to 1896,
and it was the original
definition of dyslexia.
And there are some
controversy over exactly who
it is that coined the word.
I'm in the British camp.
I think the word was coined by
a physician in the Glasgow Eye
Infirmary in Scotland.
His name was James Hinshelwood.
And he defined dyslexia
as a form aphasia marked
by the inability to
develop cyphering skills,
probable location of
the aphasiac lesion
left angular gyrus.
He was a medical doctor.
He's talking so that
we can't understand.
The word "aphasia" means the
loss or the lack of the ability
to use or understand language,
caused brain damage or nerve
damage from either
illness or injury.
So it is a form of brain damage.
And then he goes on to say the
probable location of the brain
damage is the left angular
gyrus of the brain.
That, oddly enough, is
still the medical definition
of the word dyslexia.
In the early 1920s, 30s, there
was an American physician,
his name was Doctor
Samuel Torrey Orton,
who tried to redefine dyslexia.
And his first attempt
at redefining it
was, he said that dyslexia is a
product of cross lateralization
of the brain.
And what that means is that
the left side of the brain
does what the right side
should do, and vice versa.
And even though he
authored that theory,
it wasn't very long
after it was published
that he changed his mind.
But even though he
changed his mind,
there were a lot of people
that still followed it.
And he watered it
down some and said
that it was mixed
hemispheric dominance.
Meaning that sometimes
the left side of the brain
is doing what the right side
should do, and vice versa.
And that is the primary
psychological belief
of what dyslexia is.
So both of these go back to
either our brains are miswired,
or there's actual
brain damage that
is there that is preventing
something from occurring.
And what we found
out is that, even
though both of these theories
sound good, sound reasonable,
they're incorrect.
Dyslexia is actually a
product of three things.
It is a product of thought,
it as a product of talent,
and it is product
of a low tolerance
or a low threshold
for confusion.
So when we started
working with dyslexia,
we thought we were
looking for a cure.
Well, if you consider
that a part of dyslexia
comes from talent, the only
cure for a talent that I know of
is death.
So I don't think we really
want to have a cure for it.
So we will settle
for the next best
thing, which is a
correction for it.
And the basic philosophy
behind everything that I do
is that, if you eliminate the
reason why a problem exists,
the problem will stop
existing or causing someone
to be oriented.
All of the symptoms
of dyslexia are
symptoms of the
disorientated state.
If the person to simply
turn off being disoriented,
they can turn off the symptoms.
And that's what I was doing
that I mistook for a cure.
When I realized that I wasn't
cured, that all I had done
was found a piece
to a puzzle, we
had to then dig a little
bit deeper into the puzzle
and find out what it
is that was actually
causing it to be there
in the first place.
And we discovered that it was
the feeling of confusion that
was stimulating
the disorientation.
So we isolated where the
sources of that confusion were.
And by mastering the
sources of the confusion,
we're eliminating the reason
why the problem exists
as a problem.
Now, we're not
curing the dyslexia.
We're not causing people who are
primarily thinking with images
to suddenly think
with sounds of words.
They may or may not
ever develop that skill
and it doesn't matter.
I think most people to
think primarily with images
or feel that they're
very much slowed down
by this cumbersome
slow word thinking
process-- the other
kind of thinking
is so much faster and
so much more accurate.
>>From that point,
you ended up even
expressing dyslexia
as a gift and writing
a book called "The
Gift of Dyslexia".
Now, can you talk
about this as a gift?
And then I want to go
back to this point you're
talking about, about the
brain having to slow down
to assimilate information
in black and white digits.
>>Well, we can read a
lot faster than-- it
doesn't have to go slow.
As long as you
understand the mechanics
of what it is it that
you're wanting to do.
The verbal communication
cannot be speeded up.
An awful lot of
dyslexic children
will have difficulty
with learning how to talk
and their speech
patterns sometimes
might even be a bit garbled.
Those things are corrected
along with correcting
the other problems that
are related to dyslexia.
Most people think that
dyslexia is a reading problem.
No.
Dyslexia affects, or can affect,
reading, writing, speaking,
spelling, mathematics,
physical coordination, and also
our perception of time.
>>Dyslexia then
doesn't necessarily
mean that a person simply
has a reading disability?
>>Well the word
dyslexia, we use it
because it is the parent term.
The different aspects
of dyslexia-- and there
are more than 80 different
words that they use now
for different
aspects of dyslexia.
And the current,
most popular one,
is attention deficit disorder.
We consider it just another
one of the aspects of dyslexia.
And all of it is correctable,
we can correct every form of it.
>>Let's go to the next higher
octave, how is this a gift?
>>In evaluating
how a person would
go about developing
dyslexia, there
are certain characteristics
that we have.
And the first one is, we are
born with the genetic code that
allows us to do things that
a normal person would not
be able to do.
And what it allows
us to do is, it
allows us to cause a
disorientation to occur.
Now, all human beings disorient.
It is a normal, natural thing.
In fact, this
disorientation is one
of the things you have to do in
order to go to sleep at night.
If you ever have a sudden
feeling like you're falling,
or your body suddenly jerks
just before you go to sleep,
that's the moment when
the disorientation occurs.
If you've ever
had the experience
of riding in a vehicle or
sitting in a vehicle that's
stationary, something
outside the vehicle
moves and you have the
sensation that you're moving,
that fall sensation, or
that false perception,
is coming from disorientation.
It happens to everyone.
But some of us are born
with the genetic code that
allows us to do it without
an outside stimuli.
And we discover this
ability very early in life,
probably before
we're six months old.
We discover that by using
that part of our anatomy,
we can actually perceive things
that other people wouldn't
be able to perceive.
We can hear maybe
10 times better
than a normal human being.
Our ability to detect smells
and odors can be much enhanced.
Literally, is like being able
to see around corners or see
through walls.
So probably the very
first time any of us
ever use our ability
to disorient,
we use it to recognize our
mother, the person that
feeds us.
And we then expand
the use of that
to other things in
the environment.
And as a result of that, we
will become very environmentally
aware.
Much more so than a
normal human being.
And we can explore the
environment mentally much more
thoroughly than a normal human
being would be able to do.
But in doing this, we also
create a crossroads for us.
Our early childhood
development isn't
going to go straight down the
way it does for other children.
You look at the early
childhood development books
that most expectant
mothers will look at,
and they read about what they
can expect from their child.
We're not going to do that.
Let's take just one of these.
An individual who is exploring
the environment mentally
will either be very
motivated to become mobile.
In other words, they're very
motivated now to get out
there and not just
explore it mentally,
but to get their hands on
it, to get it in their mouth,
to explore it physically.
So a person like
this is going to be
very motivated to
control movement.
So they will start crawling very
early, and by the time they're
supposed to start crawling,
they're already up
and running around.
But on the other hand, the
person has already explored it.
They already know
where it is and what
it is, they don't
need to be mobile.
So they aren't motivated
to become mobile.
So the time to start crawling
comes and goes, they don't.
It's time for them
to start walking,
and they're still not
even crawling very well.
And everyone thinks that there's
something wrong with the child.
The only thing that's wrong
is they're not motivated.
The same thing happens
with talking and language.
On one route, you can be very
motivated to communicate.
On the other route, you have
no need to communicate at all.
So if you go down the route
where it happens quickly,
everybody thinks
that you're advanced.
Right?
Parents are very
happy with that.
But if you go down the
road where it's delayed,
it's quite the
opposite reaction.
It is seen as something
wrong with the individual
as a developmental
delay, there's
something wrong with the
child, do therapy to fix it.
No.
The only thing that's really
missing is the motivation.
So we have this going
on in the background,
and it would look like this
is something that is negative.
But at the same time, we are
also primarily thinking only
with images.
Now all infants, all
human beings, this
is our native way of
thinking, with images.
You can't even do
verbal thinking
until you've learned language.
So you have to know the language
before you can do verbal.
So it is the nonverbal thinking
that is native to all people.
>>This is one thing I've
always been curious about.
If as a species the
masses have not really
read until the last
150 years, what
a huge paradigm shift, what
a huge shift for the brain
to have to go through from
this other conceptual thinking
through images and such, and
the verbal word verses written.
What has this done to us?
>>Well it has brought
us to another crossroads
in being humans.
And we're either going
to kill ourselves
or we're going to figure out
a way to survive through it.
But if you go through
Europe and you
visit the cathedrals
of Europe, you walk in.
I mean, for me, I was very
surprised because they all
look like comic books on the
inside with all that art work.
Until you realize that that
was the only way that they had
of communicating with
the masses of people,
because the masses of people
couldn't read written language.
So they tried to show it to
them in the form of paintings
and murals inside the churches
and the religious centers.
>>And now we're at a
period again to such a
really short time after we
began reading as a species,
to where we're going
to back into a world
of graphic imagery, of voice
recognition, et cetera.
How soon before we've
actually blown past the need
to have to simulate
information in this way?
>>Well I think that's
for the next generation.
>>Seems like a hard
thing to adapt to.
>>I think as for the next
evolutionary stage of mankind--
is going to have
to deal with that
and they will probably see
not as a problem at all,
as just something that
they'll just blow past.
Because they will look back at
us as being rather redundant.
>>And doesn't that
seem natural in that
what we appear to be
evolving into via graphics
through the internet,
computers, et cetera?
It's really our native way
of processing information
anyway, through
images and sound.
>>Now see, the whole
thing about human beings
is that we have
a greater ability
to adapt than the other
creatures on the planet Earth.
I mean, we can make these
adaptions, we can grow.
And in the process
of doing that,
we are pushing the
limits and the need
for us to change genetically.
Mankind goes-- I mean,
we'll make a big change
and then we'll stay that
way for a period of time,
and then we'll make
another big change.
And we have been making changes.
And if we want to look at an
indication or an indicator
of when there is a major
revolutionary change, what
we have to look at
is the intelligence
of the human being.
I see four earlier times
within the last 400 years
where attempts to be
made for human beings
to get more intelligent.
And each time you will
see a pocket or pockets
of greater intelligence.
Like right at the
end of the Dark Ages
we see people like Leonardo
da Vinci and that whole group.
But it didn't catch
on, it didn't stick.
Then we come a
little further along
and we see the
Keplers, that era.
And again, it didn't stick.
And then we come
almost to modern times
and we see people like Albert
Einstein, and Thomas Edison,
and Henry Ford, and that group.
And again, it didn't stick.
But about 70 years ago,
there was the beginning
of what we're into right now.
>>Can you explain that?
>>I have at home a document
that I got from the government,
from the Government
Accounting Office.
And it was published in
January of this year that
says that the number of
children entering the education
system with autism has increased
500% in the last 10 years.
Now, part of that 500% is a
change in awareness of autism.
And two, a change in the
diagnostic criteria for autism.
But that would only account
for maybe 20% to 50%,
we're talking about
a 500% increase.
>>So we're talking about
an evolutionary change?
>>We are talking about
an evolutionary change.
And this evolutionary change
didn't start 10 years ago,
it started 70 years ago, and
it just barely now at the point
where it is
attracting attention.
And we've got maybe
four more generations
before the incidences
of autism is 100%.
>>Does this spill
over into the area
that's lesser known,
which has to do
these pockets of
extremely gifted children
around the planet?
>>That's exactly what
we're talking about.
>>Being able to know
everything at once.
>>That is exactly what it
is that we're talking about.
It is happening in all
cultures, every place in a world
where there are human
beings, all of the races.
We're all going through
this evolutionary change
at the same time.
This one isn't going to die.
This one is not going to die
out, it's not going to stop.
When you get a 500% increase
in a 10 year period of time,
realize that goes from 22,020
to 11 million in 10 years.
>>And there are no
systems to accommodate
this kind of intelligence?
>>There is no understanding.
Now, the higher functioning
form of autism we
know how to correct
that, we know
what it is that has
to be done to fix it.
We don't advertise it,
we don't talk about it.
Because the more severe
forms, the Kanners syndrome,
is something that we haven't
been able to address.
The research project that I am
been embarking on right now--
10 years ago I
left this research,
I'm now getting back into it.
And it is very important.
It is crucial to
my way of thinking.
When the incidence
of autism is 100%,
who is going to care for
the autistic children?
Who is going to
control government?
Autistic individuals.
>>Especially when we really
are not clear on what it is.
>>Other people are not
clear on what it is.
For me, it is very
clear of what it is.
>>For you, it's clear.
You are one of the-- yes, the
brilliants locked up in this--
>>The new ones.
These people are called
a lot of different names
by a lot of different people
that have looked into it.
Star children and
indigo children.
I know them simply as new ones.
>>The new ones.
>>Yes.
>>And in the past, when we have
corrected a high functioning
autistic individual,
the IQ range
settles out between
about 130 and 180.
I've only worked successfully
with two Kanners syndrome
individuals.
Their IQs settle out above 180.
>>Amazing.
>>Now we're not talking about
a 15% increase in intelligence,
we are talking about
probably about 100% increase
in intellect intelligence.
In fact, right now there's bit
of a research thing going on
in New Zealand where a person
is following my instructions
and working with an autistic
boy that at this stage as an IQ
that is probably beyond
the ability to be measured.
We're not talking about
a 200 or a 250 IQ,
it's mind boggling the
intellect that we're
going to be seeing in 10 years.
>>So it's no coincidence
that these people
are being born into
this period of history?
>>Yeah.
>>What is this showing you?
What is this saying to you?
>>It's our evolutionary change.
We will either adapt to
the evolutionary change
or we will succumb to it.
And I feel a part of
my future, in fact, I
know that the purpose that I
am alive, the reason that I
am here is to be
involved in making
it possible for this
occurrence to happen.
Now, as human
beings, as we evolve,
you can't make a
gain in one area
without making a sacrifice
in some other area.
And we're already at the
very top of this chain.
And what we have always
sacrificed in order
to be here-- and
it's not just us,
it's the other
animal forms as well.
When we make it a
gain, what we sacrifice
is usually our basic instincts.
And we're told,
medically, that we
don't have very
many to being with.
That a human baby is born with
the fewest natural instincts
of any animal that is born.
Yet, the goal for this
next evolutionary change
is taking, again, away
from a natural instinct.
And part of the natural
instinct that is taken away
is what is causing the
sudden rise in dyslexia.
Excuse me, in autism.
>>Because this interview is too
long to put into one download,
we have a second part
that continues his journey
through the process of
discovering the sudden 500
fold increase in autism
over the last decade.
Our evolution as a species
and how our education system
is going to need to respond.
Just click on Ron
Davis Part Two.
Until next time,
thanks for watching.